Welcome to Jeremy’s IT Lab. This is
a free, complete course for the CCNA.
If you like these videos, please
subscribe to follow along with the series.
Also, please like and leave a comment, and share
the video to help spread this free series of
videos. Thanks for your help. Also, remember
to sign up via the link in the description
to get all of the lab files for this course, so
you can try it out yourself in packet tracer.
If you want more labs like these, I highly
recommend picking up Boson’s NetSim for the CCNA.
It’s a network simulator with tons of guided
labs covering all of the topics you need to
know for the CCNA. Click the link in
the video description to check it out.
In this lab we’ll practice configuring static NAT
on R1. PCs 1, 2, and 3 have private IP addresses,
so they are unable to access the Internet.
We need to configure NAT on R1 to allow them
to use the Internet, for example to access
8.8.8.8, a DNS server. So let’s do step 1,
which is to ping from PC1 to 8.8.8.8. So, from
the CLI of PC1 I’ll try that. PING 8.8.8.8.
It will take a bit of time for each ping
to timeout, but all four pings should fail.
R1 will try to send the pings
out over the Internet, but the
ISP will simply drop the traffic,
because of the private IP address.
So let’s get right into static NAT
configuration on R1 in step 2. First,
let’s configure the inside and outside
interfaces. ENABLE. CONF T. INTERFACE G0/0.
Is this the inside or outside interface? Well,
it’s the interface connected to the Internet,
to the external network, so it’s the
outside interface. IP NAT OUTSIDE. And next,
INTERFACE G0/1. This interface is connected
to the internal network, so IP NAT INSIDE.
Okay, next let’s configure those static NAT
mappings. EXIT. So, we’ll map each PC’s private IP
to a public IP in the 100.0.0.0/24 subnet. I’ll do
PC1 first. IP NAT INSIDE SOURCE STATIC 172.16.0.1,
and then I’ll map it to 100.0.0.1, keeping the
host portion the same to make it simple. Next
I’ll hit the up arrow, and change these addresses
to 100.0.0.2 and 172.16.0.2 for PC2. And then do
that again, 100.0.0.3 and 172.16.0.3 for PC3. And
that’s it, our static NAT configuration is done.
EXIT. Now, before trying that ping again from PC1
let’s check the NAT translations and statistics.
SHOW IP NAT TRANSLATIONS. Here you can see
the three static mappings we just configured,
mapping these inside local addresses to
inside global addresses. Now let’s check the
statistics. SHOW IP NAT STATISTICS. Okay, 3 total
translations, and here are the outside and inside
interfaces we configured. Now let’s try some pings
and then we’ll check the translations again after.
First I’ll ping from PC1 to 8.8.8.8. PING
8.8.8.8. Okay, the ping works this time. Then,
step 4 says to ping google.com from each PC. I’ve
configured 8.8.8.8 as the DNS server of each PC,
so they should contact 8.8.8.8 to learn the IP
of google.com, and then they should be able to
ping google.com. So, PING google.com. Okay, it
works. Now I’ll try to ping google from PC2.
PING google.com. Okay, it works here too. And
finally the same from PC3. PING google.com.
Okay, the ping works, so let’s
check the translations on R1.
SHOW IP NAT TRANSLATIONS. Okay, there
are a lot of translations this time.
Here you can see the static translations, still in
the table. Below them are three UDP translations,
all for destination 8.8.8.8 port 53.
These dynamic entries are for when PC1, 2,
and 3 used DNS to learn the IP of google.com. And
all of these entries up above are for the pings.
Notice, as I pointed out in the lecture, that
the inside local address is translated to the
inside global address, but the outside local
and outside global addresses are the same.
That’s because we’re only doing
source NAT, not destination NAT.
Okay, finally step 5 is to
clear the NAT translation table.
So, the command is CLEAR IP NAT TRANSLATION, and
then an asterisk. Now let’s check which entries
remain. SHOW IP NAT TRANSLATIONS. All of the
dynamic entries are gone, and only the static
entries remain. As I mentioned in the lecture,
the dynamic entries will timeout after a certain
period of time and be cleared from the table, but
this command lets you manually clear them. Okay,
so in this lab we practiced configuring static
source NAT. That’s all for this lab. Next,
let’s take a look at a bonus practice lab
from Boson Software’s NetSim for CCNA.
Okay here's today's Boson NetSim practice lab.
So the lab I have selected is Static NAT 1. So
in Boson NetSim for CCNA there are five different
NAT labs, and two of them cover static NAT.
So here is the lab topology, and it looks like
we are going to configure NAT here on Router4,
because it's connected to what seems like
an internet router, and this is its internal
network with switch1, switch2, and
two PCs, PC1 and PC3. So these are
the commands you need to know. All commands
we've already covered in the lecture video.
The IP addresses of each device and here are the
lab tasks. Okay, so there are eleven steps in this
one single lab task, so let's go through all of
them. First, attempt to ping from PC1 to Router3.
Was the ping successful? Why or why
not. Okay, so I will open up PC1.
And attempt to ping Router3. Let's
see if that works. Was it .1.1? Yes.
Okay it seems the ping is not working. Okay,
so perhaps Router3 is a internet router,
so it is not accepting these pings that have a
source IP address that is a private IP address.
Okay, on Router4 configure NAT to statically
translate PC1's IP address to 180.10.1.15.
Okay, so let's do that. So I'll open the
CLI of Router4. The password is cisco, okay.
So let's configure that mapping. IP
NAT INSIDE SOURCE STATIC, and then
PC1's IP address is, here it is. 192.168.1.2.
And we will map it to 180.10.1.15. Okay, so we've
configured the mapping, but that's not all you
need to configure for static NAT, as you know.
Okay, which interface should be configured
as the inside interface on Router4? Okay, so
it should be fastethernet0/1, that is the inside
interface. And then the outside will be serial0/0.
Okay, so let's configure those interfaces.
INTERFACE FASTETHERNET0/1 is the
inside, so IP NAT INSIDE. And
INTERFACE SERIAL0/0. IP NAT
OUTSIDE. Okay and let's try that ping again
from PC1 to Router3. Okay, it works. Perfect.
Okay let's check that NAT translation table
on Router4. DO SHOW IP NAT TRANSLATION.
Okay so we have the static mapping here. Looks
like there are two entries for that. I'm not
sure about why that is. And then the entry for the
ping we just issued. The inside local IP address
is translated to what inside global address? Well
that's what we just configured, 180.10.1.15. Does
the inside global IP address normally represent a
public or a private IP address? Well it normally
represents a public IP address because it is
the global one, it's what the outside network,
for example the internet, knows. And you can't
use private IP addresses on the Internet. Okay,
step 8. On Router4 configure NAT to statically
translate PC3's IP address to this IP, .16.
Okay so let's do that. IP NAT INSIDE SOURCE STATIC
192.168.1.3, is PC3's IP address. And 180.10.1.16.
Okay, so display the NAT translation
table again. Let's do that.
Okay, I can see mapping for both of
them. So, 192.168.1.3 is mapped to .16.
Okay let's try that ping, from,
oh it says from Router3 to PC1.
Interesting, okay. So I will open up Router3.
That is here. Router3 attempting to ping PC1.
So, I think this will not work because it's
a router out on the Internet trying to ping
a public, oh sorry not a public, a private IP
address. So that should fail. But let's try.
PING 192.168.1.2. Yes, and
that U means unreachable,
okay. Attempt to ping from Switch2 to Router3.
From Switch2, does Switch2 have an IP address?
Let's check. SHOW IP INTERFACE BRIEF.
Okay, it does have an IP address.
But NAT is not configured on Router4
to translate Switch2's IP address,
so this should not work. But
let me try. PING 180.10.1.1.
Okay, and just like in the beginning with PC1,
no NAT is configured for Switch2's IP address,
so Switch2 is not able to ping Router3. Okay so
that's all for this lab. I'm going to click on the
grade lab function here, and let's see if I did
everything correctly. Okay, yes I did, awesome.
Great, and by the way if you ever have
any problems during these labs in NetSim,
Boson provides solutions down at the
bottom here, with some great explanations,
actually if you want to read these you can
pause the video, I'll scroll through them.
Okay, so that was a quick look at a lab
in Boson Software's NetSim for CCNA.
NetSim has over 100 guided labs like these. Some
of them are pretty short and simple like this one,
but then some of them are actually
quite difficult and complicated.
So I think it's a great study resource,
a great labbing resource for the CCNA.
If you want to get NetSim, please follow
the link in the video description.
Before finishing today’s video I want
to thank my JCNP-level channel members.
To join, please click the ‘Join’ button under
the video. Thank you to Anand, Pavel, Abraham,
Serge, Njoku, Viktor, Roger, Raj, Kenneth, Seamus,
H W, Brandon, Aaron, Marcel, Kone, Donald, C Mohd,
Gustavo, Anthony, Benjamin, Tshepiso, Justin,
Prakaash, Nasir, Erlison, Marko, Daming, Ed,
Value, John, Funnydart, Velvijaykum, Mark, Yousif,
Boson Software, Devin, Lito, Yonatan, and Vance.
Sorry if I pronounced your name incorrectly,
but thank you so much for your support.
This is the list of JCNP-level members at the
time of recording by the way, March 20th 2021.
If you signed up recently and your name isn’t
on here don’t worry, you’ll be in future videos.
Thank you for watching. Please
subscribe to the channel,
like the video, leave a comment, and share the
video with anyone else studying for the CCNA.
If you want to leave a tip, check the links in the
description. I'm also a Brave verified publisher
and accept BAT, or Basic Attention Token, tips
via the Brave browser. That's all for now.